## Climate Change Adaptation Assessment

The principal objective of the climate change adaptation assessment of key systems is to identify and assess key vulnerabilities, hazards and risks for the country 
and provide analysis on emerging trends and future climate scenarios. A key outcome of the assessment is the promotion of priority adaptation actions, projects and 
programs that respond to the current and future impacts of climate change on natural and human systems, taking into consideration the specific needs of local 
communities and vulnerable groups. Each of the mega systems identified, center on key areas critical to the advancement of Sao Tome and Principe’s sustainable 
development pathway

The climate system in Sao Tome and Principe is influenced by the annual migration and dynamics of the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ). The climate is 
characterized as complex on the basis of it being a small archipelago endowed with a unique orography. Air temperature and rainfall data are only available at five 
meteorological stations, four stations are situated in Sao Tome and one in Principe. In effect, only the Sao Tome Airport weather station can detect climate change 
due to its longer time series data compared to other meteorological stations across the island with data series of less than a decade.

The Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs), which involve four different 21st century pathways of GHG emissions and atmospheric concentrations, air pollutant 
emissions and land use8, were used to project their effects on key climate-related systems. The RCPs help project the impacts under various climate scenarios and 
are useful for the country’s climate change adaptation assessment. The RCP scenarios detailed in this NAP, which include the intermediate scenario (RCP4.5) and the 
very high GHG emissions scenario (RCP8.5), are compared to the baseline scenario which represents a pathway without additional efforts to constrain emissions.

### Exposure to Climate Impacts and Risks
#### Current Climate (Baseline):
Sao Tome and Principe is among 13 countries uniquely situated along the equator. Its characterized by a humid tropical climate with two seasons: a shorter dry 
season (gravana), which lasts approximately three months from June to August and a longer rainy season that extends to nine months from September to May. The 
seasons are influenced by the location of the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), which significantly affects rainfall in many equatorial countries. Longer term 
shifts in the ITCZ can lead to extreme droughts or flooding in neighboring regions. The ITCZ migrates from the southern hemisphere to the North, causing the peak of 
the rainy season to occur on average from February to May and then again from October to December when the ITCZ migrates back south. The period of roughly two 
months between December and January, referred to as Gravanito, experiences a slight reduction in rainfall.

Given the characteristics of the archipelago, Sao Tome and Principe has an average surface temperature of 25.6° C and high levels of humidity that can reach over 
90% at higher altitudes. The country has many microclimates predominately as a function of rainfall, temperature and topographical relief. It therefore follows 
that temperatures drop as altitude increases. This is the case for Pico de Sao Tome which sits at an elevation of 2024m in the central west part of the island 
and Pico de Principe at an altitude of 948m in the southern region. The country’s orographic precipitation is determined by the volcanic massifs that result in 
rainfall gradients, which offer significant water potential. Average annual rainfall is 2000-3000 mm/year. The highest annual average rainfall of 7000mm is 
recorded in the southwest region of the island of Sao Tome (Quijá and Xufe-xufe river basins), which is home to dense tropical forests. The savanna is located in 
the northeastern parts of the island, where rainfall is measured at an annual average of below 1000mm. Parts of the northern regions of the island, namely the 
districts of Água Grande and Lobata, experience an average monthly rainfall of below 50mm during gravana. There are marked complexities of engaging in 
horticulture without irrigation, particularly in light of the fact that the highest population densities are situated in these regions.

Both the island of Sao Tome and the island of Principe are dealing with the impacts of climate change and extreme weather events. The country continues to be 
impacted by natural hazards, which include coastal and river flash floods, storms and droughts. Frequent flash floods and severe storms occur with high 
incidences of hail, lightening and strong winds that threaten the country. The sectors most affected by very frequent events are the services and agriculture 
sectors, which are impacted less than once every decade10. Under the current climate, 23 000 people on average, representing 12% of the total population in 2016, 
are annually affected by droughts and affected livestock (i.e., animals living in areas hit by droughts) represent 14% of the total livestock. Beyond this, under 
both present and future climates, physical crop losses are centered around four crops (banana, coconut, oil palm and taro).

#### Emerging Climate Trends:
Warming of temperatures and reductions in rainfall are of paramount importance to Saotomeans as this can decrease the river flow and influence the availability 
of subterranean water. In certain regions of Sao Tome and Principe climate impacts such as sea-level rise, flooding and coastal erosion have been observed at 
levels that risk damage and destruction to major infrastructure. According to the baseline, RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 scenarios, the annual average temperature trend 
reported by Sao Tome Airport’s weather station, indicated an increase of 0.6 °C between 1960 and 2016, representing an average warming of around 0.01 °C per 
year. The warming comes into effect from the months of October until May. The highest annual average temperature of 26.2 °C was recorded in 1998, whereas the 
lowest annual average temperature of 24.7 °C was recorded in 1964. This demonstrates an increase in interannual variability of the climate in Sao Tome and 
Principe. Notably, the five warmest years to-date have occurred in the last 20 years, which further indicates an increasing trend of warming of annual average 
temperatures. Parallel to other countries in West Africa, temperature observations in Sao Tome and Principe reveal an increasing trend. The figures below, based 
on climate analysis from 1970 to 2015, demonstrate an average increase in temperature. Trends in average annual precipitation, however, are not clearly defined 
and are variable in time and space.

INSERT IMAGES HERE

#### Future Climate Scenarios: Projected Future Climate
A climate-based study on Sao Tome and Principe detailed in the Third National Communication, observed changes in total rainfall during the rainy season and dry 
season for the 2041–2070 period. In the RCP4.5 scenario, rainfall projections predict a rainier climate from October to May (rainy season) and normal to dry 
conditions from June to September (dry season). In the RCP8.5 scenario, projections indicate a reduction in rainfall for both rainy and dry periods, with the 
exception of December and January based on a monthly analysis, which demonstrates an increase in rainfall on the island of Sao Tome. This stands in contrast to 
the country’s gravanito period under the baseline scenario where rainfall typically decreases in the months of December and January. In terms of climate 
extremes, projections show a surge in total annual rainfall under RCP4.5 and an increase in rainfall intensity under both scenarios, particularly in the Caué and 
Lembá districts in the southwestern region of the island of Sao Tome. Further to this, there is a rise in the number of consecutive dry days that signals a 
prolonged dry season (gravana) and uneven temporal distribution of rainfall in the region. With respect to extreme temperature, climate projections under both scenarios (RCP4.5 and RCP8.5) indicate warming, with a surge in heat waves on hot days and an increase in annual minimum temperatures.

INSERT IMAGES HERE

Under future climate conditions and with the inclusion of socio-economic projections, GDP impacted by droughts (i.e., the economic value produced in areas hit by 
droughts) could rise to USD $600 million13. The number of affected livestock is projected to marginally decline relative to current climate conditions. The 
agricultural production losses owing to droughts are projected to drop under future climate conditions for all six crops of banana, coconut, cocoa, fruits, palm 
oil and taro. Under future climate conditions, the agricultural loss decreases in both islands. Moreover, sea level is projected to rise by 0.13- 0.56 meters by 
2090 compared to average levels over the 1980-1999 period14. Fishermen will be increasingly exposed to climate variability and will continue to be affected by 
the diminution of marine resources due to disruptions to coastal ecosystems, destruction of mangroves and increases in storms and other natural hazards.

#### Regional Projections:
As it concerns regional projections, under RCP4.5, global models predict an increase in rainfall in West Africa between the months of October to March. There is 
a variation in rainfall of about 10% to 20% over the 1986-2005 reference period. The climate models for the periods 2016–2035, 2046–2065, and 2081–2100 indicate 
that changes in temperature are consistent across the models. In the middle of the 21st century, specifically for the years 2046–2065, the average temperature 
increase ranges from 1° to 2°C in the Gulf of Guinea. A slight increase in average rainfall for the period 2036–2065 is observed, particularly from May to 
September during gravana in the Gulf of Guinea, including the islands of Sao Tome and Principe.

INSERT IMAGES HERE

#### Local Projections:
Local climate change projections for the 2041–2070 period is based on the 1971–2000 period, for which projections indicate warming of temperatures in the study 
belt, principally from October to May. During gravana warming is more pronounced in the central region of Sao Tome, where the altitude is highest. All in all, 
warming trends under both RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 is comparable, with an increase in intensity of warming in the RCP8.5 scenario. The local projections estimated for 
both islands on the basis of the ETA model, predict an increase in temperature of approximately 2.5 °C under RCP4.5 and 3°C in RCP8.5 in both rainy and dry 
periods. For both the rainy season and dry season under both scenarios, local scale projections do not demonstrate changes in annual temperature across the 
islands of Sao Tome and Principe.

### Assessment by Key Systems
#### Agriculture
The agriculture sector is integral to Sao Tome and Principe’s national economy and its vulnerability to climate change is captured, in part, by thermal stresses 
to the environment. Considering that subsistence agriculture in the country is narrowly characterized by its fragility and poor planning techniques, it tends to 
import a large portion of its food for consumption. In Sao Tome and Principe, subsistence agriculture crop production consists of taro, corn, tomato, cassava, 
pineapple and breadfruit, among other crops. Its food commodity markets focus on the export trade of cocoa, coconut, coffee (Robusta and Arabica), flowers, 
vanilla, chili pepper and palm oil. On the whole, the agriculture sector employs 60% of the labor force but represents only 22.4% of GDP16. With respect to food 
security and access, 10% of households have low food consumption and 12.6% of households have limited food consumption.

##### Priority Area: Cocoa (Theobroma cacao L.) Production
At the turn of the century, Sao Tome and Principe was one of the global leaders in the production of cocoa beans. Among myriad factors, the tropical climate, 
heavy rainfall, and the fertile volcanic soils gave rise to the rapid development of cocoa plantations called roças. Sao Tome and Principe’s cocoa is recognized 
for its superior quality and a burgeoning organic cocoa sector. Cocoa production constitutes a main share of the agriculture sector, accounting for roughly 17% 
of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP)17 as the main export commodity produced on plantations. Following the progressive redistribution of sizeable cocoa 
plantations at the outset of the 1990s, small farmers assumed responsibility of a majority of cocoa production as colonial plantations were nationalized. Cocoa 
farmers supplemented their income by producing additional crops such as vegetables, fruits, vanilla and pepper for trade. As a consequence of the 1998 
international cocoa price crash, producers realized that cocoa production would not secure their livelihoods. Studies later suggested that combining organic 
cocoa production and fair-trade principles would improve farmers income. Notwithstanding the substantial contribution of cocoa to the domestic economy, its 
export share now comprises a negligible share of the global cocoa market.

##### Vulnerability of the Agriculture Sector
The following is a précis of key vulnerabilities affecting Sao Tome and Principe’s agricultural landscape:

- Fragile and poorly organized subsistence agriculture

- Intensive agriculture in areas of great slope

- Increase in temperature throughout the entire country in recent years

- Decrease in rainfall and the subsequent reduction of river flows in the east

- Lengthened dry seasons

- Landslides due to torrential rains (particularly on mountain slopes)

- Lack of good handling practices and zootechnical/agroforestry management

- Absence of animal and plant species that are adapted to extreme weather conditions i.e., drought and desertification

- Lack of environmental education among the population

##### Exposure to Climate Impacts and Risks
In the agriculture subsector, greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions originate from enteric fermentation, manure management, agricultural soils, savanna fires and 
burning of agricultural wastes which in total amount to 12.5 Gg CO2eq19. Further, studies on the risk index of agricultural crops such as taro, maize, cocoa and 
pepper were undertaken and reported in the Third National Communication. Projections for each crop indicated high risk to arable lands on account of the current 
climate.

Future Climate Scenarios: Projected Impact on Cocoa

As concerns cocoa, Sao Tome and Principe has experienced a decline in productivity in the last decade, as cocoa bean yields fell from 1333 hg/ha in 2008 to 1014 
hg/ha in 2018 (FAOSTAT, 2020). The regions in north of Lembá, west of Lobata and Mé-Zóchi are of great import in terms of the local cocoa production. Climate 
change impacts such as intense tropical storms hamper production and cause destruction of the natural environment suitable for cultivating cocoa trees. Further 
impacts include increased temperatures and prolonged dry seasons that trigger thermal and water stress and bring about vulnerability to pest infestation. 
Protozoal diseases of cocoa trees such as Black pod disease thrive in humid climates linked to warmer temperatures. Under RCP4.5, there is moderate risk in Sao 
Tome due to low productive potential of the cocoa bean and water stress. In the RCP8.5 scenario, these cocoa growing regions- specifically the regions north of 
Lembá, west of Lobata and Mé-Zóchi are expected to sustain high exposure to climate risks due to water stress. The water resources sector in Sao Tome and 
Principe is among the most vulnerable to climate change. In effect, the reduction of groundwater contributes to the waning of water currents causing poor 
distribution of water resources to the population, with major impacts to soils critical for agricultural and agro-pastoral production. According to the 
literature, other regions of the island where risk classifications increased were among the main the contributors to water stress.

INSERT IMAGES HERE

Projected Impact on Taro  

Along with risks to cocoa, projections for taro indicate an increased risk due to thermal stress (South of the Caué district), which could increase its exposure 
to taro plant disease such as taro leaf blight (TLB) (Phytophthora colocasiae). TLB which is a major disease of the taro plant is caused by a pseudo-fungus and 
could threaten food security in the country. The risk assessment of the taro plant has resulted in a moderate to very high-risk rating in most regions of the 
island of Sao Tome. 

Future Climate Scenarios: Projected Impact on Corn  

With regard to corn, there is high risk to corn production along the border regions of the Caué and Lembá districts. The high risk to corn is due to exposure to 
rust under RCP4.5. The rapid spread of corn rust takes place when favorable environmental conditions, for instance suitable temperatures and moisture, persist 
for a protracted period throughout the growing season. Considering a RCP8.5 scenario, there would be an upsurge in risks to corn production areas classified as 
very high risk, owing to an increase in thermal stress and exposure to rust diseases. In an alternative variety of corn, the risk exposure of corn production in 
a number of coastal regions increased from very low to high due to corn crop’s low yield potential. 

##### Climate Risks in Agriculture Production
The following list of climate risks, stem from the interaction between natural hazards in Sao Tome and Principe and the vulnerability and exposure of agricultural communities, their livestock and the natural systems within which they operate.  

 - Existing planting areas could be reduced due to the change in edaphoclimatic conditions leading to a decrease in agriculture production 

- Heavy rainfall that can cause flooding, resulting in loss of microelements and nutrients in soil, critical for agriculture and grazing 

- Phyto-pathogenic microorganisms such as fungi, bacteria and viruses that when exposed to conditions of precipitation and increase in temperature, become more reproductive and proliferate  

- The warming of temperature in extremes, triggering the proliferation of parasites (carapatas) and affecting the metabolism of animals especially during the productive cycles of pastures, which could lead to a reduction in crop yields and animal numbers  

- Reduction in productive agriculture leading to reduced farmers' income

#####  Adaptation Options 
The diversity of climate change impacts and adaptation options coupled with the complexity of adaptation process demonstrate the unrealistic assumption of perfect adaptation by individual farmers20. Still, promising adaptation measures to smooth out fluctuations in agriculture yields (and indirectly social welfare), include:  

- Examination into and enhancement of cultural practices to reduce the impacts of water and thermal stress 

- Surveying and development of crop varieties resistant to water and thermal stress, to ensure food security 

- Offering technical advice and extension services to producers on production techniques to generate high quality yields e.g., cocoa beans 

- Provision of guidance on how to use specialized equipment and storage facilities to limit spoilage after harvest e.g., solar cocoa dryers 

- Offering technical guidance on existing regulations and legal frameworks e.g., on organic cocoa regulations 

- Development and adoption of heat-resistant cultivars 

- Enhancement of farming practices that reduce pests and crop/plant diseases  

- Implementation of a seed distribution program of climate-resilient seeds for small holders 

- Development of appropriate cultivation techniques in sloping areas and other risk zones 

-‘Floodproofing’ measures (such as elevation of living spaces)  

- Adoption of climate smart agricultural techniques 

- Institution of coastal protection measures (such as seawalls, bulkheads, and revetments) 

#### Fisheries 
The fishery sector plays a critical role in Sao Tome and Principe’s national economy as it represents 3.7% of GDP. It generates employment, supports foreign 
exchange and provides the populations’ nutritional needs in terms of animal protein, of which 70% is derived from fish. The jurisdictional waters of Sao Tome and 
Principe, represented by the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), span almost 165,000km and offer a fishing potential of 29,000 tonnes21. Sao Tome and Principe’s 
continental shelf, which is very narrow, covers 5-10km and reaches depths of less than 200 meters, is reputed to house the most ergonomic fishing grounds for 
artisanal fishing. Yet, marine fishery resources show a persistent and substantial decline as a consequence of overfishing and abandonment of traditional 
techniques in lieu of unsustainable practices. Two decades prior, Sao Tome and Principe’s fish stock was gauged at 8500 tonnes of pelagic fish, among 185 fish 
species stemming from 67 families.  Most recent data from 2013 indicate that the domestic supply of demersal fish stands at 1108 tonnes, while pelagic fish and 
crustaceans amount to 3073 tonnes and 15 tonnes, respectively for the same year (FAOSTAT, 2018).  

INSERT IMAGES HERE

The fishery sector is among the most vulnerable to climate change and is further threatened by a hostile environment, notably the lack of large estuaries, which 
could sustain a variety of marine species and an absence of coastal upwelling that could give rise to rich nutrients that nourish the surface water and improve 
its biological productivity. As shown in Figure 3, small scale fishing and semi-industrial fishing contribute to the fishery sector, whereas industrial fishing 
is taken up by foreign vessels in Saotomean waters by way of bilateral fishing agreements. Unsustainable fishing techniques are diminishing fish resources at a 
faster rate than can be replenished. Artisanal fishing comprises a quarter of the country’s workforce, signaling the importance of the sector in terms of social 
and economic development outcomes. While both men and women are active in the fishery sector, men’s roles are centered on fish capture and harvest, while women 
focus, by and large, on bringing the fish to secondary wholesale markets. 3,051 artisanal fishermen work at 44 landing sites across the islands, 29 landing sites 
are situated on the island of Sao Tome and 15 on the island of Principe.

##### Priority Area: Fish Conservation 
The conservation of coastal and marine biological diversity, particularly the conservation of fisheries, is critical to the ecological balance of the marine 
system, the social well-being of the population and the economic growth potential of the country. Rapid population growth is putting downward pressure on natural 
resources including fish stocks with predicted effects on biodiversity24, calling into question the sustainability of the fishery sector. Causative to the 
decrease in fishing stocks is the use of unsustainable fishing techniques such as bay area fishing, use of dynamite and fine-meshed nets. At present, the 
unregulated exploitation of halieutic resources coupled with poor monitoring and surveillance capacities, limited knowledge of the configuration of national 
fisheries resources, and the anemic application of the 2001 Law of Fisheries (Law No. 9/2001) and the 2010-2025 Fisheries Plan, directly contribute to the steady 
depletion of fish resources off the coast of Sao Tome and Principe. This reduction of fish resources in turn reduces the income of fishermen including fish 
traders and engenders poverty among coastal inhabitants.  

According to the objectives of the 2015-2020 National Strategy Plan for Biological Diversity, local conservation actions could include:  

- Construction of a protected marine area on both islands in which fish stocks are monitored and provided the opportunity to mature and procreate 

- Spatial ordering and sustainable management of Sao Tome and Principe’s EEZ 

- Sensitization of coastal populations to means of conservation 

- Monitoring of actions to protect and conserve coastal areas  

- Strengthening of inter-sectorial actions of various government institutions in the field of conservation and sustainable management 

- Establishment of an action plan to ensure oversight 

- Improving the monitoring and inspection of actions under the legal framework for fisheries 

##### Vulnerability of the Fishery Sector 
On the basis of views and perceptions of local communities’, key vulnerabilities of the fishery sector were identified through the NAPA as well as the Convention 
on Biological Diversity (CBD) Sixth National Report. Sea level rise and lighting strikes were among the climate change impacts cited, which affect vulnerable 
groups such as artisanal fishermen and their families, rural inhabitants and farmers. Artisanal fishermen to date employ age-old fishing techniques. Due to the 
limited fish supply in their immediate vicinity, fishermen are routinely forced to travel the distance in pursuit of fish25.  As it happens, fishermen often 
vanish at sea or experience damage or destruction to their fishing gear and vessels due to extreme weather events, such as strong winds, fog and turbulence at 
sea. Squalls have wreaked havoc on fishing activities and caused rivers to flood, which has brought about hardships to fishing families. The land, boat moorings 
and beaches have also been impacted by coastal erosion. Sedimentation of river water during the rainy season has obstructed reproduction areas and growth zones 
critical to the proliferation of several demersal species and a number of pelagic species.  

INSERT IMAGES HERE

Main vulnerabilities:   

 - Loss of materials and artisanal fishing equipment during fishing  

- Loss of life due to disappearance at sea 

- Partial or complete destruction of vessels at docks or beaches 

- Damage to fishermen’s dwellings on account of sea water intrusion  

- An upsurge in the level of poverty among women due to loss of fishing equipment, livelihoods and lives of (fishermen) spouses 

- Increase in the number of school-age children that drop out of school in order to economically contribute to the household through fishing  

- Overexploitation of resources as a result of poor sectorial management  

- Use of timeworn and unsafe vessels, and inadequate equipment e.g., the vessel fleets are mostly composed of single-person, wooden, non-motorized, small-capacity boats 

- Weak infrastructure and poor governance 

- Poor health and sanitation 

##### Exposure to Climate Impacts and Risks  

Humid wind currents, prevailing in the southwest regions, are intercepted by the Sao Tome and Principe’s topological relief. Strong winds and storms have 
historically affected Saotomeans. Particularly in 2001, 301 people were affected in the agricultural community in Santa Catarina and later in 2009, 43 people 
were affected in Roça Santa Cecília. Recent climate-related disasters have been a result of the rain and wind regime. With respect to natural hazards, the 
potential increase in fog has been attributed to changes in the wind. 

Future Climate Scenarios: Projected Impact on the Fishery Sector 

On account of determining climate risks, wind speed indexes (mean, maximum and annual minimum values) were established under the climate-based study detailed in 
the Third National Communication. The wind speed indexes, which are based on projected changes in surface wind extremes indicate a tendency towards a reduction 
across all values of wind in future scenarios, under both RCP4.5 and RCP 8.5. There is a trend in the reduction of daily maximum winds that suggests a weakening 
of wind events under future climate projections26. Still, there are numerous accounts on the effects of strong winds that trigger waves that cause damage to 
infrastructure and loss of life of fishermen. Expressly, the artisanal fishery sector has witnessed an increase in the number of days with strong winds and 
maritime turbulence27. As a consequence, storms have contributed to the loss of life, in addition to fishermen who disappear on the high seas due to heavy fog. 
This impact is further experienced by communities in Neves, Pantufo and Praia Melão, where there is a high incidence of trolling and every 1 in 20 families is 
left orphaned or widowed. By and large, losses peak in February during the gravanito period (the foggy season), which are later registered in March as search and 
rescue efforts continue for nearly one month following the actual event.  

What is more, an increase in the predicted temperature of 2.5 °C for the 2040-2060 period will likely cause turbulences in sea currents due to the crossing of 
cold currents in Benguela and warm currents in the Gulf of Guinea, which would cause an upwelling. The rise in sea temperature is expected to cause fish to 
migrate towards the poles towards deeper and colder waters. On account of a reduction in the quantity of halieutic resources, fishermen would have to travel 
father out to sea and attempt to reach 60 meters in depth to access fish. In some instances, it is reported that small-scale fishermen travel up to 40 miles from 
the shore and reach fishing ground depths between 100 and 250 meters28. As aforementioned, reduction in fish catch is also attributable to the overexploitation 
of fishing resources and the use of unsustainable practices. In order to ensure the survival of the artisanal fishery sector, changes in current techniques are 
required to adapt to climate change. Sao Tome and Principe’s NDC reveals that a 50% loss in artisanal fisheries production is forecasted as a result of climate 
change. 

INSERT IMAGES HERE

#####  Adaptation Options 

Fish conservation and preservation: 

 - Investment in small-infrastructures and facilities for fishing communities e.g., cold storage, ice-machine and landing sites, with proper management systems to ensure their sustainable use 

- Construction of conservation facilities for fish 

- Means for reducing post-harvest losses in fisheries 

- Means of preservation that will extend the storage life without substantially altering the nature of the raw material 

- Selective fishing gear that avoids the capture, retention, and subsequent discarding of immature fish and unwanted species 

- Systems to locate abandoned, lost, or otherwise discarded fishing gear (ALDFG) which continues to catch fish (causing unintentional mortality), resulting in “ghost fishing” 

- Proper on-board handling of fish, for example ensuring fish are chilled and good hygiene conditions prevail to avoid cross contamination, as well as ensuring the physical integrity of fish to avoid bruising and damage to fish flesh and accelerated spoilage  

 Fishing safety and improvements to infrastructure: 

- Investment in suitable fishing vessels, gear and protocols to ensure safety of fishermen 

- Investment in trainings for fishermen on new technologies that help assess climate risks  

- Delimitation of fishing zones with solar signaling buoys 

- Implementation of an alert system for deep sea fishing navigation 

- Construction and installation of Fish Aggregating Device (FAD) in coastal areas 

- Distribution of portable navigation tools and rescue equipment (e.g., GPS, compasses and lifejackets) and installation of communication and rescue systems 

- Construction of coastal defense mechanisms in affected areas 

- Construction of quality floating docks at points of embarkation and disembarkation  

 Bilateral fishing agreements and good governance:  

 - Review of fishing and private license agreements in order for Sao Tome and Principe to tap into benefits of marine resources within its jurisdictional waters 

- Address management challenges of maritime sectors and develop a Blue Economy through the use of Marine Spatial Planning (MSP)  

 
